NP-SMLR is a software for nucleosome occupancy inference at single-molecule level. It takes the aligned signal-levels from Oxford Nanopore sequencing reads, and outputs the positions of all detected nuclosomes on each molecule.


# Dependencies

The current version has been tested in the Linux system with:
1. GCC (version 7.3.0);
2. Perl (version 5.16.3);
3. SAMtools (version 1.9);
4. BEDtools (version 2.28.0).



# Installation

You can download and compile the latest version (v1.0) as follows:

```
git clone https://github.com/Au-Lab/NP-SMLR.git
cd NP-SMLR
make
chmod +x NP-SMLR.pl
```

After compilation, three executable files (`Likelihood`, `Detection` and `NclsPos`) will be generated in the folder `NP-SMLR/bin`.


**Please ensure that you have added**

1. The folder `NP-SMLR/bin`
2. `SAMtools`
3. `BEDtools`

**to your `PATH`.**



# Before running NP-SMLR

Before running NP-SMLR,
1. the reads have be aligned to reference genome; and
2. the alignments between event signals and reference genome should be obtained using `nanopolish eventalign`.

The tutorial of `nanopolish eventalign` can be found at https://nanopolish.readthedocs.io/en/latest/quickstart_eventalign.html.



# Usage

The command is

```
NP-SMLR.pl -b sorted_bam_file -e event_align_scale -o output_dir
```

* Parameters

-b   <STRING>   Name of the BAM file that records the alignment of reads. The BAM file must be sorted.
-g   <STRING>   Event alignment file generated by "nanopolish eventalign" (with flag --scale-events).
-t   <STRING>   Name of output folder.

* Example

The test example can be run using the command

```
NP-SMLR.pl -b ./testdata/sort_test.bam -e ./testdata/eventalign_scale_test.txt -o output
```

The generated files are stored under `output`.



# Output

The file `ncls_pos.bed` in the output folder records the coordinates of nucleosomes detected on each molecule. The columns represent:

Column 1: Chromosome ID;

Column 2: Start position of nucleosome;

Column 3: End position of nucleosome;

Column 4: Name of molecule (read);

Column 5: Quality score of alignment (obtained from BAM file);

Column 6: Strand on which the read is aligned.


The file `detection.txt` in the output folder records the methylation score of every GpC site on each molecule, which is essentially the posterior probability of methylation. The first two columns record the coordinates of GpC site. The fourth column is the read name. The last column is the methylation score.



# Current version

The version of the current release is v1.0.



# Contact

Please contact wanganqi18@gmail.com for any question.



# License

**Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International Public License**

For details, please read `NP-SMLR/License`.



# Citation

Yunhao Wang, Anqi Wang, Zujun Liu, Andrew L. Thurman, Linda S. Powers, Meng Zou, Yue Zhao, Adam Hefel, Yunyi Li, Joseph Zabner, Kin Fai Au. Single-molecule long-read sequencing reveals the chromatin basis of gene expression. *bioRxiv*, 2019. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/533158
